README.md, before:

# CarND-Controls-MPC
Self-Driving Car Engineer Nanodegree Program

---
## The Model
### States
The model used for this project is the Kinematic Bicycle Model which comprises of the following states:
* x - the vehicle's x position.
* y - the vehicle's y position
* ψ(psi) - orientation of the vehicle (in radians).
* v - The current velocity.
* cte - The Cross-Track-Error.
* epsi - The orientation error.

### Actuators
Actuator outputs are acceleration (a) and steering angle (delta).

### Update Equations
The model combines the states and the actuatoions of the previopus time step to predict the state at the current time step by using the update equations as shown below:
![equations](./update_eq.png)

## Timestep Length and Elapsed Duration (N & dt)
I wanted to choode the (N x dt) product as 1 sec beacuse the environment/horizon won't change much in 1 sec. So after choosing various combinations like (8,0.12), (7,0.14) and (10,0.15) I found (10,0.1)  to work the best. The model determines the correct trajectory for 1 second intervals. Also (10,01) values work better with the 100ms latency compared to the other values.

## Polynomial Fitting and MPC Preprocessing
The waypoints are transformed from global coordinate system to vehicle coordinate system. It simplifies the polynomial fitting process since the the vehicle's x and y coordinate are at the origin (0,0) and also the orientation is zero.

## Model Predictive Control with Latency
The original kinematic equations depend on actuations from previous timestep. With an additional 100ms latency, which is also the timestep interval, the actuation is applied after another time step. So to account for this I have used the actuations from the previous timestep (MPC.cpp 125-126). Further, penalizing the cost parameters appropriately helps improving performance. I first started penalizing `cte` and `epsi` to check performnce by multiplying the cte^2 by 1000 and epsi^2 by 1 and ran it in the simulator, but when I reversed it I found that the car stayed much closer to the yellow trajectory (MPC.cpp 66-67). Therefore, I chose the epsi factor to be greater than cte factor. Further, for smooth turning and acceleration I penalized the sequential steering and accelertion actuation (MPC.cpp 81-82). I found reducing the use of actuators helpful for the vehicle to have a smoother ride at the same time it is important to consider teh actuations, hence i penalized them by a small amount (MPC.cpp 74-75).

## Dependencies

* cmake >= 3.5
 * All OSes: [click here for installation instructions](https://cmake.org/install/)
* make >= 4.1(mac, linux), 3.81(Windows)
  * Linux: make is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: [install Xcode command line tools to get make](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: [Click here for installation instructions](http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/make.htm)
* gcc/g++ >= 5.4
  * Linux: gcc / g++ is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: same deal as make - [install Xcode command line tools]((https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: recommend using [MinGW](http://www.mingw.org/)
* [uWebSockets](https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets)
  * Run either `install-mac.sh` or `install-ubuntu.sh`.
  * If you install from source, checkout to commit `e94b6e1`, i.e.
    ```
    git clone https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets 
    cd uWebSockets
    git checkout e94b6e1
    ```
    Some function signatures have changed in v0.14.x. See [this PR](https://github.com/udacity/CarND-MPC-Project/pull/3) for more details.
* Fortran Compiler
  * Mac: `brew install gcc` (might not be required)
  * Linux: `sudo apt-get install gfortran`. Additionall you have also have to install gcc and g++, `sudo apt-get install gcc g++`. Look in [this Dockerfile](https://github.com/udacity/CarND-MPC-Quizzes/blob/master/Dockerfile) for more info.
* [Ipopt](https://projects.coin-or.org/Ipopt)
  * If challenges to installation are encountered (install script fails).  Please review this thread for tips on installing Ipopt.
  * Mac: `brew install ipopt`
       +  Some Mac users have experienced the following error:
       ```
       Listening to port 4567
       Connected!!!
       mpc(4561,0x7ffff1eed3c0) malloc: *** error for object 0x7f911e007600: incorrect checksum for freed object
       - object was probably modified after being freed.
       *** set a breakpoint in malloc_error_break to debug
       ```
       This error has been resolved by updrading ipopt with
       ```brew upgrade ipopt --with-openblas```
       per this [forum post](https://discussions.udacity.com/t/incorrect-checksum-for-freed-object/313433/19).
  * Linux
    * You will need a version of Ipopt 3.12.1 or higher. The version available through `apt-get` is 3.11.x. If you can get that version to work great but if not there's a script `install_ipopt.sh` that will install Ipopt. You just need to download the source from the Ipopt [releases page](https://www.coin-or.org/download/source/Ipopt/).
    * Then call `install_ipopt.sh` with the source directory as the first argument, ex: `sudo bash install_ipopt.sh Ipopt-3.12.1`. 
  * Windows: TODO. If you can use the Linux subsystem and follow the Linux instructions.
* [CppAD](https://www.coin-or.org/CppAD/)
  * Mac: `brew install cppad`
  * Linux `sudo apt-get install cppad` or equivalent.
  * Windows: TODO. If you can use the Linux subsystem and follow the Linux instructions.
* [Eigen](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page). This is already part of the repo so you shouldn't have to worry about it.
* Simulator. You can download these from the [releases tab](https://github.com/udacity/self-driving-car-sim/releases).
* Not a dependency but read the [DATA.md](./DATA.md) for a description of the data sent back from the simulator.


## Basic Build Instructions


1. Clone this repo.
2. Make a build directory: `mkdir build && cd build`
3. Compile: `cmake .. && make`
4. Run it: `./mpc`.

## Tips

1. It's recommended to test the MPC on basic examples to see if your implementation behaves as desired. One possible example
is the vehicle starting offset of a straight line (reference). If the MPC implementation is correct, after some number of timesteps
(not too many) it should find and track the reference line.
2. The `lake_track_waypoints.csv` file has the waypoints of the lake track. You could use this to fit polynomials and points and see of how well your model tracks curve. NOTE: This file might be not completely in sync with the simulator so your solution should NOT depend on it.
3. For visualization this C++ [matplotlib wrapper](https://github.com/lava/matplotlib-cpp) could be helpful.)
4.  Tips for setting up your environment are available [here](https://classroom.udacity.com/nanodegrees/nd013/parts/40f38239-66b6-46ec-ae68-03afd8a601c8/modules/0949fca6-b379-42af-a919-ee50aa304e6a/lessons/f758c44c-5e40-4e01-93b5-1a82aa4e044f/concepts/23d376c7-0195-4276-bdf0-e02f1f3c665d)

## Editor Settings

We've purposefully kept editor configuration files out of this repo in order to
keep it as simple and environment agnostic as possible. However, we recommend
using the following settings:

* indent using spaces
* set tab width to 2 spaces (keeps the matrices in source code aligned)

## Code Style

Please (do your best to) stick to [Google's C++ style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html).

## Project Instructions and Rubric

Note: regardless of the changes you make, your project must be buildable using
cmake and make!

More information is only accessible by people who are already enrolled in Term 2
of CarND. If you are enrolled, see [the project page](https://classroom.udacity.com/nanodegrees/nd013/parts/40f38239-66b6-46ec-ae68-03afd8a601c8/modules/f1820894-8322-4bb3-81aa-b26b3c6dcbaf/lessons/b1ff3be0-c904-438e-aad3-2b5379f0e0c3/concepts/1a2255a0-e23c-44cf-8d41-39b8a3c8264a)
for instructions and the project rubric.

## Hints!

* You don't have to follow this directory structure, but if you do, your work
  will span all of the .cpp files here. Keep an eye out for TODOs.

## Call for IDE Profiles Pull Requests

Help your fellow students!

We decided to create Makefiles with cmake to keep this project as platform
agnostic as possible. Similarly, we omitted IDE profiles in order to we ensure
that students don't feel pressured to use one IDE or another.

However! I'd love to help people get up and running with their IDEs of choice.
If you've created a profile for an IDE that you think other students would
appreciate, we'd love to have you add the requisite profile files and
instructions to ide_profiles/. For example if you wanted to add a VS Code
profile, you'd add:

* /ide_profiles/vscode/.vscode
* /ide_profiles/vscode/README.md

The README should explain what the profile does, how to take advantage of it,
and how to install it.

Frankly, I've never been involved in a project with multiple IDE profiles
before. I believe the best way to handle this would be to keep them out of the
repo root to avoid clutter. My expectation is that most profiles will include
instructions to copy files to a new location to get picked up by the IDE, but
that's just a guess.

One last note here: regardless of the IDE used, every submitted project must
still be compilable with cmake and make./

## How to write a README
A well written README file can enhance your project and portfolio.  Develop your abilities to create professional README files by completing [this free course](https://www.udacity.com/course/writing-readmes--ud777).

Commit message:

Update the latency consideration in the model

README.md, after:

# CarND-Controls-MPC
Self-Driving Car Engineer Nanodegree Program

---
## The Model
### States
The model used for this project is the Kinematic Bicycle Model which comprises of the following states:
* x - the vehicle's x position.
* y - the vehicle's y position
* ψ(psi) - orientation of the vehicle (in radians).
* v - The current velocity.
* cte - The Cross-Track-Error.
* epsi - The orientation error.

### Actuators
Actuator outputs are acceleration (a) and steering angle (delta).

### Update Equations
The model combines the states and the actuatoions of the previopus time step to predict the state at the current time step by using the update equations as shown below:
![equations](./update_eq.png)

## Timestep Length and Elapsed Duration (N & dt)
I wanted to choode the (N x dt) product as 1 sec beacuse the environment/horizon won't change much in 1 sec. So after choosing various combinations like (8,0.12), (7,0.14) and (10,0.15) I found (10,0.1)  to work the best. The model determines the correct trajectory for 1 second intervals. Also (10,01) values work better with the 100ms latency compared to the other values.

## Polynomial Fitting and MPC Preprocessing
The waypoints are transformed from global coordinate system to vehicle coordinate system. It simplifies the polynomial fitting process since the the vehicle's x and y coordinate are at the origin (0,0) and also the orientation is zero.

## Model Predictive Control with Latency
The original kinematic equations depend on actuations from previous timestep. With an additional 100ms latency, which is also the timestep interval, the actuation is applied after another time step. So to account for this I have used the actuations from the previous timestep (MPC.cpp 125-126). I also incorporated the latency in the model to predict the states after the latency time (main.cpp 146-148). Further, penalizing the cost parameters appropriately helps improving performance. I first started penalizing `cte` and `epsi` to check performnce by multiplying the cte^2 by 1000 and epsi^2 by 1 and ran it in the simulator, but when I reversed it I found that the car stayed much closer to the yellow trajectory (MPC.cpp 66-67). Therefore, I chose the epsi factor to be greater than cte factor. Further, for smooth turning and acceleration I penalized the sequential steering and accelertion actuation (MPC.cpp 81-82). I found reducing the use of actuators helpful for the vehicle to have a smoother ride at the same time it is important to consider teh actuations, hence i penalized them by a small amount (MPC.cpp 74-75).

## Dependencies

* cmake >= 3.5
 * All OSes: [click here for installation instructions](https://cmake.org/install/)
* make >= 4.1(mac, linux), 3.81(Windows)
  * Linux: make is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: [install Xcode command line tools to get make](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: [Click here for installation instructions](http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/make.htm)
* gcc/g++ >= 5.4
  * Linux: gcc / g++ is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: same deal as make - [install Xcode command line tools]((https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: recommend using [MinGW](http://www.mingw.org/)
* [uWebSockets](https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets)
  * Run either `install-mac.sh` or `install-ubuntu.sh`.
  * If you install from source, checkout to commit `e94b6e1`, i.e.
    ```
    git clone https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets 
    cd uWebSockets
    git checkout e94b6e1
    ```
    Some function signatures have changed in v0.14.x. See [this PR](https://github.com/udacity/CarND-MPC-Project/pull/3) for more details.
* Fortran Compiler
  * Mac: `brew install gcc` (might not be required)
  * Linux: `sudo apt-get install gfortran`. Additionall you have also have to install gcc and g++, `sudo apt-get install gcc g++`. Look in [this Dockerfile](https://github.com/udacity/CarND-MPC-Quizzes/blob/master/Dockerfile) for more info.
* [Ipopt](https://projects.coin-or.org/Ipopt)
  * If challenges to installation are encountered (install script fails).  Please review this thread for tips on installing Ipopt.
  * Mac: `brew install ipopt`
       +  Some Mac users have experienced the following error:
       ```
       Listening to port 4567
       Connected!!!
       mpc(4561,0x7ffff1eed3c0) malloc: *** error for object 0x7f911e007600: incorrect checksum for freed object
       - object was probably modified after being freed.
       *** set a breakpoint in malloc_error_break to debug
       ```
       This error has been resolved by updrading ipopt with
       ```brew upgrade ipopt --with-openblas```
       per this [forum post](https://discussions.udacity.com/t/incorrect-checksum-for-freed-object/313433/19).
  * Linux
    * You will need a version of Ipopt 3.12.1 or higher. The version available through `apt-get` is 3.11.x. If you can get that version to work great but if not there's a script `install_ipopt.sh` that will install Ipopt. You just need to download the source from the Ipopt [releases page](https://www.coin-or.org/download/source/Ipopt/).
    * Then call `install_ipopt.sh` with the source directory as the first argument, ex: `sudo bash install_ipopt.sh Ipopt-3.12.1`. 
  * Windows: TODO. If you can use the Linux subsystem and follow the Linux instructions.
* [CppAD](https://www.coin-or.org/CppAD/)
  * Mac: `brew install cppad`
  * Linux `sudo apt-get install cppad` or equivalent.
  * Windows: TODO. If you can use the Linux subsystem and follow the Linux instructions.
* [Eigen](http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/index.php?title=Main_Page). This is already part of the repo so you shouldn't have to worry about it.
* Simulator. You can download these from the [releases tab](https://github.com/udacity/self-driving-car-sim/releases).
* Not a dependency but read the [DATA.md](./DATA.md) for a description of the data sent back from the simulator.


## Basic Build Instructions


1. Clone this repo.
2. Make a build directory: `mkdir build && cd build`
3. Compile: `cmake .. && make`
4. Run it: `./mpc`.

## Tips

1. It's recommended to test the MPC on basic examples to see if your implementation behaves as desired. One possible example
is the vehicle starting offset of a straight line (reference). If the MPC implementation is correct, after some number of timesteps
(not too many) it should find and track the reference line.
2. The `lake_track_waypoints.csv` file has the waypoints of the lake track. You could use this to fit polynomials and points and see of how well your model tracks curve. NOTE: This file might be not completely in sync with the simulator so your solution should NOT depend on it.
3. For visualization this C++ [matplotlib wrapper](https://github.com/lava/matplotlib-cpp) could be helpful.)
4.  Tips for setting up your environment are available [here](https://classroom.udacity.com/nanodegrees/nd013/parts/40f38239-66b6-46ec-ae68-03afd8a601c8/modules/0949fca6-b379-42af-a919-ee50aa304e6a/lessons/f758c44c-5e40-4e01-93b5-1a82aa4e044f/concepts/23d376c7-0195-4276-bdf0-e02f1f3c665d)

## Editor Settings

We've purposefully kept editor configuration files out of this repo in order to
keep it as simple and environment agnostic as possible. However, we recommend
using the following settings:

* indent using spaces
* set tab width to 2 spaces (keeps the matrices in source code aligned)

## Code Style

Please (do your best to) stick to [Google's C++ style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html).

## Project Instructions and Rubric

Note: regardless of the changes you make, your project must be buildable using
cmake and make!

More information is only accessible by people who are already enrolled in Term 2
of CarND. If you are enrolled, see [the project page](https://classroom.udacity.com/nanodegrees/nd013/parts/40f38239-66b6-46ec-ae68-03afd8a601c8/modules/f1820894-8322-4bb3-81aa-b26b3c6dcbaf/lessons/b1ff3be0-c904-438e-aad3-2b5379f0e0c3/concepts/1a2255a0-e23c-44cf-8d41-39b8a3c8264a)
for instructions and the project rubric.

## Hints!

* You don't have to follow this directory structure, but if you do, your work
  will span all of the .cpp files here. Keep an eye out for TODOs.

## Call for IDE Profiles Pull Requests

Help your fellow students!

We decided to create Makefiles with cmake to keep this project as platform
agnostic as possible. Similarly, we omitted IDE profiles in order to we ensure
that students don't feel pressured to use one IDE or another.

However! I'd love to help people get up and running with their IDEs of choice.
If you've created a profile for an IDE that you think other students would
appreciate, we'd love to have you add the requisite profile files and
instructions to ide_profiles/. For example if you wanted to add a VS Code
profile, you'd add:

* /ide_profiles/vscode/.vscode
* /ide_profiles/vscode/README.md

The README should explain what the profile does, how to take advantage of it,
and how to install it.

Frankly, I've never been involved in a project with multiple IDE profiles
before. I believe the best way to handle this would be to keep them out of the
repo root to avoid clutter. My expectation is that most profiles will include
instructions to copy files to a new location to get picked up by the IDE, but
that's just a guess.

One last note here: regardless of the IDE used, every submitted project must
still be compilable with cmake and make./

## How to write a README
A well written README file can enhance your project and portfolio.  Develop your abilities to create professional README files by completing [this free course](https://www.udacity.com/course/writing-readmes--ud777).
